[blog] Blog introducing mui v8 (#45670)
mui/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/mui-x-v8.md

Telemetry is released as an opt-in feature. We recommend enabling it by adding the following code to your project, close to your license validation:

```js
import { muiXTelemetrySettings } from '@mui/x-license';

muiXTelemetrySettings.enableTelemetry();
```

You can find more details in our [telemetry guide](/x/guides/telemetry/).

## Priority Support – A New Support Service

A few months ago, we launched Priority Support with a few customers, and now we’re excited to invite more users to take advantage of this service.

Priority Support offers fast, dedicated assistance with guaranteed response times, ensuring that technical issues on both MUI X and MUI Core are addressed swiftly and efficiently.

For full details on the benefits and service levels of Priority Support, please see our [Support SLA](https://mui.com/legal/technical-support-sla/).

If you’re interested in upgrading to Priority Support, don’t hesitate to [contact our sales team](mailto:sales@mui.com) for more information or purchase it directly through your account page.

## Support for Material UI

> When planning this major release, our goal was to support the last two major versions of Material UI. However, we faced a tough choice: continue supporting older versions (v5 and v6) or fully embrace the innovations of **Material UI v7**. With native ESM support, improved package management, and seamless integration with modern bundlers like Vite and webpack, v7 represents the future of Material UI. Supporting both wasn’t feasible, so we chose to move forward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When planning this major release, our goal was to support the last two major versions of Material UI. However, we faced a tough choice: continue supporting older versions (v5 and v6) or fully embrace the innovations of **Material UI v7**. With improved ESM support and seamless integration with modern bundlers like Vite and webpack, v7 represents the future of Material UI. Supporting both wasn’t feasible, so we chose to move forward.
```
Too wordy, and "improved package management" doesn't make much sense in this context.

> When planning this major release, our goal was to support the last two major versions of Material UI. However, we faced a tough choice: continue supporting older versions (v5 and v6) or fully embrace the innovations of **Material UI v7**. With native ESM support, improved package management, and seamless integration with modern bundlers like Vite and webpack, v7 represents the future of Material UI. Supporting both wasn’t feasible, so we chose to move forward.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When planning this major release, our goal was to support the last two major versions of Material UI. However, we faced a tough choice: continue supporting older versions (v5 and v6) or fully embrace the innovations of **Material UI v7**. With native ESM support, improved package management, and seamless integration with modern bundlers like Vite and webpack, v7 represents the future of Material UI.
```

This statement is a bit misleading – it suggests it's not possible to use Material UI v5/v6.

> As a result, **MUI X v8 now supports Material UI v7 natively**, ensuring your applications benefit from the latest improvements. We understand that change can be challenging, but migrating to v7 has been designed to be as smooth as possible—with comprehensive migration guides and GitHub support to assist you every step of the way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, **MUI X v8 now supports Material UI v7 out-of-the-box**, ensuring your applications benefit from the latest improvements. We understand that change can be challenging, but migrating to v7 has been designed to be as smooth as possible—with comprehensive migration guides and GitHub support to assist you every step of the way.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For users who want to upgrade to MUI X v8 while staying on Material UI v6, we've prepared a [guide](/x/migration/usage-with-material-ui-v5-v6/) to help you configure your project to keep using v6.
```

It is referring to [this guide](https://deploy-preview-17164--material-ui-x.netlify.app/x/migration/usage-with-material-ui-v5-v6/) from https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/17164

## Migration Guide

We have built a migration guide for Material UI and one for each of the advanced components. They detail every breaking change from previous versions with the recommended approach to fix them, ensuring that you can transition smoothly without the least amount of hassle. We care about an smooth migration, and that's been a priority for us when planning our new major versions.

Please follow the instructions in our [migration guide](/x/migration/).

## Long-Term Support

> We're now moving **MUI X v7 to Long-Term support**, while support for **MUI X v6 is discountinued**. In addition to critical bug fixes and security updates, v7 will continue to receive some bug fixes as a safe net for your your transition for Material UI v7.

Reviewer: > as a safe net for your your transition for Material UI v7.

Did you mean to mention Material UI v7 here? Shouldn't it be "MUI X v8" instead?

Explore all your options when handling [Server-Side Data](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/).

### Data Source on the Community Plan

Great news—the Data Source is now part of the community plan!

We're unifying our approach to handling server-side data across all plans, creating a single, cohesive framework.

Explore your options in our [Data Source Docs](/x/react-data-grid/data-source/).

### New Toolbar

The [redesigned toolbar](/x/react-data-grid/components/toolbar/) not only looks fantastic but also empowers developers one step further through an open composition of sub-components, allowing you to tailor the toolbar's layout precisely to your application's needs.

<figure>
  <img width="100%" alt="The new toolbar's design" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/new-toolbar.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>The new toolbar's design</figcaption>
</figure>

This new developer experience, based on composition, may feel different from our previous approach—but it sets a new standard. We’ll soon extend this enhanced experience to other key subcomponents, such as the filter panel and columns management panel, ensuring a cohesive and powerful toolkit for advanced customization.

> Dive into our new docs section: [Sub-Components Composition](/x/react-data-grid/components/usage/)

Reviewer 2: I would make this link reflect the docs page title:

```suggestion
Dive into our new docs section: [Components usage](/x/react-data-grid/components/usage/)
```

Reviewer 3: Don't forget a period! 😁

```suggestion
Dive into our new docs section on [component usage](/x/react-data-grid/components/usage/).
```

- [Migration](#migration)
- [Long-Term Support](#long-term-support)
- [What's next](#whats-next)
- [How to Get Involved](#how-to-get-involved)

## Data Grid

### Pivoting [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan')

The wait is over! With pivoting, your users can easily restructure and summarize large datasets: group related data, calculate aggregates (such as sums, averages, and counts), and compare different data categories side by side. This flexibility enables faster insight discovery and more efficient data analysis.

The feature is available out-of-the-box, but you can also create a pre-configured setup depending on your user requirements.

<figure>
  <video autoplay muted loop playsinline width="1046" height="720" controls>
    <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/pivoting.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption>A common pivoting use case</figcaption>
</figure>

Learn how to use pivoting [now](/x/react-data-grid/pivoting/).

### Ask Your Table - Featuring AI Assistance on the Data Grid [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan')

> After a period of test with users and pilot customers, we're excited to introduce our new AI Assistant for the Data Grid: [Ask Your Table](/x/react-data-grid/ask-your-table/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a period of test with users and pilot customers, we're excited to introduce our new AI Assistant for the Data Grid: [Ask Your Table](/x/react-data-grid/ai-assistant/).
```

Now your users can interact with data using natural language queries and extract data insights quickly as ever.

For example, if you’re working with an Olympics medal dataset, you can simply ask, “Who won the most gold medals this century?” and the Data Grid will automatically apply the right filters, groupings, and aggregations to display your answer—all that while keeping your dataset private.

<figure>
  <img width="2084" height="928" alt="An example use case showcasing the answer to the question with the correct sorting, filters and grouping" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/ask-your-table.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>An answer from the Data Grid</figcaption>
</figure>

**Feature's key Benefits:**

- **Enhanced usability**: Simplify interactions with data by asking questions in plain language.

> - **Unlock the full potential of the Data Grid**: Explore, combine, and discover powerful data analysis features often hidden behind menus, without the tedious hopping from one menu to another.

Reviewer 4: This sounds like the regular work with the grid is tedious
Not sure how to exactly rephrase this but the message I would propose is that: the update let's you simply explain what kind of information you are looking for without the need to think about how to configure the grid to show you that

- **Data privacy:** No need to share your dataset—the service model only requires your column definitions and a few data samples.

> Interested in bringing this feature to your users? [Contact us](mailto:sales@mui.com) to get access to your API Key!

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Interested in bringing this feature to your users? [Contact us](mailto:sales@mui.com) to get your API Key!
```

---
title: Introducing MUI X v8
description: Read all about the new release of the advanced components and other important steps forward with this new major.
date: 2025-03-31T08:00:00.000Z
authors: ['josefreitas']
tags: ['MUI X', 'Product']
manualCard: true
---

<div style="max-width: 692px; width: 100%; height: 230px; overflow: hidden; margin-bottom: 16px;">
  <a href="https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases/tag/v8.0.0">
    <img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/intro.png" alt="MUI X v8 - major stable release" width="2400" height="800" style="width: 100%; height: 100%; object-fit: cover; object-position: center;" />
  </a>
</div>

We are excited to announce the stable release of [MUI X v8.0.0](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases/tag/v8.0.0)—packed with many new features, native ESM support alongside Material UI v7, and an improved license management experience.

:::warning

> **MUI X v8 natively supports ESM** along Material UI v7. But because of that, the support for Material UI v5 and v6 don't come out-of-the-box.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
MUI X v8 features native ESM support for a seamless integration with Material UI v7. 
As a result, extra configuration is necessary to continue working with Material UI v5 and v6, which use CJS.
```

> Read more on: [Support for Material UI](#support-for-material-ui)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Learn more in the [support for Material UI](#support-for-material-ui) section below.
```

:::

> ## Table of Contents

Reviewer 3: Headers should be in sentence case throughout.

```suggestion
## Table of contents
```

  - [Radar Charts](#radar-charts)
  - [Server-Side Rendering for Charts](#server-side-rendering-for-charts)
  - [Refined Design and Interaction](#refined-design-and-interaction)
  - [HTML Legend for Charts](#html-legend-for-charts)
  - [Charts Composition](#charts-composition)
- [Enhanced License Management and Telemetry](#enhanced-license-management-and-telemetry)
- [Priority Support – A New Support Service](#priority-support-a-new-support-service)
- [Support for Material UI](#support-for-material-ui)
- [Migration](#migration)
- [Long-Term Support](#long-term-support)
- [What's next](#whats-next)
- [How to Get Involved](#how-to-get-involved)

## Data Grid

### Pivoting [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan')

The wait is over! With pivoting, your users can easily restructure and summarize large datasets: group related data, calculate aggregates (such as sums, averages, and counts), and compare different data categories side by side. This flexibility enables faster insight discovery and more efficient data analysis.

> The feature is available out-of-the-box, but you can also create a pre-configured setup depending on your user requirements.

Reviewer 3: You would only hyphenate "out of the box" if you were using it as an adjective, such as "out-of-the-box features."

```suggestion
This feature is available right out of the box, but you can also create a preconfigured setup to tailor it to your user requirements.
```

<figure>
  <video autoplay muted loop playsinline width="1046" height="720" controls>
    <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/pivoting.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption>A common pivoting use case</figcaption>
</figure>

> Learn how to use pivoting [now](/x/react-data-grid/pivoting/).

Reviewer 3: best practice for anchor text: minimum three words describing what's on the other side. When in doubt, you can always just use some or all of the page title as I've suggested here. I would also hoist this text up above the figure, because it kind of feels isolated from the rest of the relevant text.

```suggestion
Check out the [Data Grid—Pivoting](/x/react-data-grid/pivoting/) documentation to learn more.
```

> ### Ask Your Table - Featuring AI Assistance on the Data Grid [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan')

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Ask Your Table - AI assistance in the Data Grid [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan')
```

> After a period of test with users and pilot customers, we're excited to introduce our new AI Assistant for the Data Grid: [Ask Your Table](/x/react-data-grid/ai-assistant/).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
After a testing period with users and pilot customers, we're excited to introduce our new AI Assistant for the Data Grid: [Ask Your Table](/x/react-data-grid/ai-assistant/).
```

> Now your users can interact with data using natural language queries and extract data insights quickly as ever.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Now your users can interact with data using natural language queries and extract data insights faster than ever.
```

> For example, if you’re working with an Olympics medal dataset, you can simply ask, “Who won the most gold medals this century?” and the Data Grid will automatically apply the right filters, groupings, and aggregations to display your answer—all that while keeping your dataset private.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
For example, if you’re working with an Olympics medal dataset, you can simply ask, “Who won the most gold medals this century?” and the Data Grid will automatically apply the right filters, groupings, and aggregations to display your answer—all while keeping your dataset private.
```

<figure>
  <img width="2084" height="928" alt="An example use case showcasing the answer to the question with the correct sorting, filters and grouping" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/ask-your-table.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>An answer from the Data Grid</figcaption>
</figure>

> **Feature's key Benefits:**

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Key benefits:**
```

- **Enhanced usability**: Simplify interactions with data by asking questions in plain language.

> - **Unlock the full potential of the Data Grid**: Explore, combine, and discover powerful data analysis features often hidden behind menus, without the tedious hopping from one menu to another.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- **Unlock the full potential of the Data Grid**: Explore, combine, and discover powerful data analysis features often hidden behind menus, without having to hop from one menu to another.
```

- **Data privacy:** No need to share your dataset—the service model only requires your column definitions and a few data samples.

Interested in bringing this feature to your users? [Contact us](mailto:sales@mui.com) to get access to your API Key!

### List View [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

We’ve promoted List View to stable, and over this major we’re committed to enhancing this feature even further—making it easier to deliver a robust Data Grid experience on small screens.

<figure>
  <img width="512" height="768" alt="An example of a Data Grid's list view on a phone" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/list-view.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>An example of a Data Grid's list view on a phone</figcaption>
</figure>

> Learn more about [List View](/x/react-data-grid/list-view/).

Reviewer 3: same suggestion as above—I'd move this text up above the figure so it's not lonely down here.

### Row Spanning

Row spanning has also been promoted to stable, providing a reliable and flexible solution for merging cells across multiple rows. This enhancement makes it easier to create complex, multi-row layouts within your Data Grid, allowing you to present your data more effectively.

> Learn how to setup and use [Row spanning](/x/react-data-grid/row-spanning/).

Reviewer 3: "Setup" is a noun vs. "set up" which is a verb. No need to capitalize the R here.

```suggestion
Learn how to set up and use [row spanning](/x/react-data-grid/row-spanning/).
```

### Server-Side Aggregation and Lazy Loading [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

> The Data Source now supports advanced features such as server-side aggregation, and on-demand data fetching for infinite scrolling, and lazy loading.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Data Source now supports advanced features such as server-side aggregation, on-demand data fetching for infinite scrolling, and lazy loading.
```

> Explore all your options when handling [Server-Side Data](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/).

Reviewer 3: No need to capitalize here.

```suggestion
Explore all your options when handling [server-side data](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/).
```

### Data Source on the Community Plan

Great news—the Data Source is now part of the community plan!

We're unifying our approach to handling server-side data across all plans, creating a single, cohesive framework.

> Explore your options in our [Data Source Docs](/x/react-data-grid/data-source/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Explore your options in our [data source docs](/x/react-data-grid/data-source/).
```

### New Toolbar

The [redesigned toolbar](/x/react-data-grid/components/toolbar/) not only looks fantastic but also empowers developers one step further through an open composition of sub-components, allowing you to tailor the toolbar's layout precisely to your application's needs.

<figure>
  <img width="100%" alt="The new toolbar's design" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/new-toolbar.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>The new toolbar's design</figcaption>
</figure>

This new developer experience, based on composition, may feel different from our previous approach—but it sets a new standard. We’ll soon extend this enhanced experience to other key subcomponents, such as the filter panel and columns management panel, ensuring a cohesive and powerful toolkit for advanced customization.

Dive into our new docs section: [Sub-Components Composition](/x/react-data-grid/components/usage/)

### Design Agnostic Core

> We understand how customization is important to you. So with the ultimate goal to be absolutely customizable, we're taking the first step to decouple Material UI from the Data Grid Core, opening the possibility to use the Data Grid with any design system—and it’s just the beginning. On the next steps, we'll work to provide the best experience for you to build a full featured data grid that fits all your design requirements.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We understand customization is important to you. So with the ultimate goal of being fully customizable, we're taking the first step to decouple Material UI from the Data Grid Core, opening the possibility to use the Data Grid with any design system—and this is just the beginning. 

Next up, we'll work to provide the best experience for you to build a full-feature Data Grid that fits all your design requirements.
```

### No-Columns Overlay

We’ve added a no-columns overlay to serve as a clear fallback when the Data Grid has no columns to show.

> Learn more about overlays on [overlay's docs](/x/react-data-grid/overlays/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Learn more in the [overlay documentation](/x/react-data-grid/overlays/).
```

### Performance Improvements

We’ve made significant performance enhancements across the board—from smoother scrolling and faster Excel export to improved mount/resize and aggregation performance.

## Date and Time Pickers

### Time Range Picker [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

It's finally here! The highly anticipated Time Range Picker component is designed for a straightforward and efficient experience, perfect for scheduling applications and detailed period inputs.

<figure>
  <video autoplay muted loop playsinline width="477" height="538" controls>
    <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/time-range-picker.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption>Time Range Picker example</figcaption>
</figure>

Get started with the [Time Range Picker](/x/react-date-pickers/time-range-picker/).

### New view-switching Strategy

> We’ve removed the automatic view-switching in the date time and time range pickers to deliver a more consistent and user-friendly experience. Now, you can easily customize the input flow behavior to better suit your application's needs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We’ve removed the automatic view-switching in the Date Time and Time Range Pickers to deliver a more consistent and user-friendly experience. 

Now, you can easily customize the input flow behavior to better suit your application's needs.
```

> You can learn about it on [docs](/x/react-date-pickers/time-range-picker/).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can learn more about it in our [docs](/x/react-date-pickers/time-range-picker/).
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Learn more in the [Time Range Picker docs](/x/react-date-pickers/time-range-picker/).
```

### Clear `ownerState` for slots

We've refined our slot system by clearing the `ownerState` before passing props to slot components. This ensures that only the necessary properties are forwarded—resulting in a cleaner API, reduced prop clutter, and enhanced performance. By isolating internal state from presentation layers, you gain more predictable styling and greater control when customizing components.

### Accessible DOM Structure

> The Accessible DOM Structure is now the default for our field components. The new structure ensures screen readers can correctly work with the fields

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The Accessible DOM Structure is now the default for our field components. The new structure ensures screen readers can correctly work with the fields.
```

We’ve enhanced the Rich Tree View with a robust lazy loading mechanism for children. Now, child nodes are loaded on demand—reducing initial load times and improving performance when working with extensive hierarchical data. This approach ensures a smoother user experience and also minimizes unnecessary network overhead.

<figure>
  <video autoplay muted loop playsinline width="360" controls>
    <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/tree-view-lazy-loading.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption>Lazy loading of children on selection</figcaption>
</figure>

Learn how to add [lazy loading](/x/react-tree-view/rich-tree-view/lazy-loading/) to your application's Tree View.

### Performance improvements in re-rendering

We’ve optimized the Tree View to update only the components that need changes, rather than re-rendering all child nodes.
With the use of selectors to precisely target nodes for re-rendering, we’ve achieved a significant performance boost.
In upcoming releases, we’ll make another big step with the introduction of virtualization.

### Automatic selection propagation

> The Rich Tree View now supports parent/child selection propagation. This means you can select a parent and automatically select all your children, and vice-versa depending on your requirements and configuration.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Rich Tree View now supports parent/child selection propagation. This means you can select a parent and automatically select all of its children, and vice versa—depending on your requirements and configuration.
```

<figure>
  <video autoplay muted loop playsinline width="250" controls>
    <source alt="Automatic selection of children"  src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/tree-view-automatic-selection.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption>Automatic selection of children</figcaption>
</figure>

```js
type TreeViewSelectionPropagation = {
  descendants?: boolean; // default: false
  parents?: boolean; // default: false
};
```

> You can learn about this and other selection features on [Selection docs](/x/react-tree-view/rich-tree-view/selection/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can learn more in the [selection docs](/x/react-tree-view/rich-tree-view/selection/).
```

### New Customization Hook

> We’ve officially transitioned to a new developer experience for customizing TreeItems for the Rich Tree View. With our new customization hook, you can freely compose your TreeItem while still leveraging all the out-of-the-box features of the RichTreeView. This provides unparalleled flexibility to tailor your tree components to your project’s unique requirements.

Reviewer 3: great example of proper hyphenation with "out-of-the-box" here 😁

```suggestion
We’ve officially transitioned to a new developer experience for customizing Tree Items for the Rich Tree View. With our new customization hook, you can freely compose your Tree Item while still leveraging all the out-of-the-box features of the Rich Tree View. This provides unparalleled flexibility to tailor your tree components to your project’s unique requirements.
```

- **Animations:** Animations must be disabled using the `skipAnimation` prop; otherwise, the chart may render in an empty state on the initial render.

### Refined Design and Interaction

Charts in MUI X v8 have been improved with a focus on clarity and interactivity.

<figure>
  <img width="606" height="300" alt="Charts redesigned - before/after" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/charts-before-after.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>Charts redesigned before/after</figcaption>
</figure>

### HTML Legend for Charts

We’ve re-engineered the charts legend so that it’s now rendered as a native HTML element. This change gives you more control over its styling and behavior, making it easier to integrate with your design system.

### Charts Composition

We've restructured our charts composition by dividing responsibilities between two dedicated components: `<ChartDataProvider />` and `<ChartsSurface />`. The `<ChartDataProvider />` now focuses solely on managing and processing your chart data, while `<ChartsSurface />` is dedicated to rendering the visual aspects. This clear separation enhances customization, improves performance, and offers a more flexible integration with your application.

> Learn more in our [Charts Composition Documentation](/x/react-charts/composition/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Learn more in our [Charts composition documentation](/x/react-charts/composition/).
```

## Enhanced License Management and Telemetry

> Managing your license has never been easier. Our redesigned [account page](https://mui.com/store/account/) on the store allows you to view your license keys, update number of seats, renew, upgrade and more, with minimal effort.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Managing your license has never been easier. Our redesigned [account page](https://mui.com/store/account/) in the store allows you to view your license keys, update number of seats, renew, upgrade, and more.
```

<figure>
  <img width="606" height="434" alt="One of the new screens in your accounts site" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/accounts-page.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>One of the new screens in your accounts site</figcaption>
</figure>

In addition, we’ve integrated telemetry into our system to continuously enhance your experience with our products. Using this same infrastructure, you'll soon be able to manage your license without changing your key—thanks to server-side license validation.

Telemetry is released as an opt-in feature. We recommend enabling it by adding the following code to your project, close to your license validation:

```js
import { muiXTelemetrySettings } from '@mui/x-license';

muiXTelemetrySettings.enableTelemetry();
```

You can find more details in our [telemetry guide](/x/guides/telemetry/).

## Priority Support – A New Support Service

A few months ago, we launched Priority Support with a few customers, and now we’re excited to invite more users to take advantage of this service.

> Priority Support offers fast, dedicated assistance with guaranteed response times, ensuring that technical issues on both MUI X and MUI Core are addressed swiftly and efficiently.

Reviewer 3: We should avoid using the term "MUI Core" externally.

```suggestion
Priority Support offers fast, dedicated assistance with guaranteed response times, ensuring that technical issues across MUI's full product suite are addressed swiftly and efficiently.
```

For full details on the benefits and service levels of Priority Support, please see our [Support SLA](https://mui.com/legal/technical-support-sla/).

If you’re interested in upgrading to Priority Support, don’t hesitate to [contact our sales team](mailto:sales@mui.com) for more information or purchase it directly through your account page.

## Support for Material UI

> When planning this major release, our goal was to support the last two major versions of Material UI. However, we faced a tough choice: continue supporting older versions (v5 and v6) out-of-the-box or fully embrace the innovations of **Material UI v7**. With improved ESM support and seamless integration with modern bundlers like Vite and webpack, v7 represents the future of Material UI. Supporting both out-of-the-box wasn’t feasible, so we chose to move forward.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When planning this major release, our goal was to support the last two major versions of Material UI. However, we faced a tough choice: continue supporting older versions (v5 and v6) out of the box, or fully embrace the step forward with Material UI v7. With improved ESM support and seamless integration with modern bundlers like Vite and webpack, v7 represents the future of Material UI. Supporting both seamlessly wasn’t feasible, so we chose to move forward.
```

> As a result, **MUI X v8 now supports Material UI v7 out-of-the-box**, ensuring your applications benefit from the latest improvements. We understand that change can be challenging, but migrating to v7 has been designed to be as smooth as possible—with comprehensive migration guides and GitHub support to assist you every step of the way.

Reviewer 3: way too many outoftheboxes 😂

```suggestion
As a result, MUI X v8 now supports Material UI v7 by default, ensuring your applications benefit from the latest improvements. We understand this change could present a challenge, but migrating to v7 has been designed to be as smooth as possible, with comprehensive migration guides and GitHub support to assist you every step of the way.
```

> For users who want to upgrade to MUI X v8 while staying on Material UI v6, we've prepared a [guide](/x/migration/usage-with-material-ui-v5-v6/) to help you configure your project to keep using v6.

Reviewer 3: Always better to have extra-long anchor text than to just use one word.

```suggestion
For users who want to upgrade to MUI X v8 while remaining on an earlier version of Material UI, we've prepared a [guide on usage with Material UI v5 and v6](/x/migration/usage-with-material-ui-v5-v6/).
```

## Migration Guide

> We have built a migration guide for Material UI and one for each of the advanced components. They detail every breaking change from previous versions with the recommended approach to fix them, ensuring that you can transition smoothly without the least amount of hassle. We care about an smooth migration, and that's been a priority for us when planning our new major versions.

Reviewer 3: This article contains a lot of "ensuring X, Y, and Z" clauses that don't really add to the content. I would suggest combing through the piece again to remove more of them.

```suggestion
We've published migration guides for Material UI and each of the advanced components. These guides detail every breaking change from previous versions with the recommended approach to fix them. We care deeply about providing a smooth migration, so it's been a top priority for us when planning our new major versions.
```

Please follow the instructions in our [migration guide](/x/migration/).

## Long-Term Support

> We're now moving **MUI X v7 to Long-Term support**, while support for **MUI X v6 is discountinued**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We're now moving **MUI X v7 to long-term support**, while support for **MUI X v6 is discontinued**.
```

> In addition to critical bug fixes and security updates, v7 will continue to receive some bug fixes as a safe net for your your transition to MUI X v8.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to critical bug fixes and security updates, v7 will continue to receive occasional necessary updates as a safety net while you transition to v8.
```

> You can check our [supported versions in our docs](/x/introduction/support/#supported-versions).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can check the [supported versions in our docs](/x/introduction/support/#supported-versions) for more information.
```

Once you’ve migrated to MUI X v8, you’ll benefit from the latest features and performance enhancements, with no disruptive breaking changes until the next major release.

## What’s Next

Our roadmap for MUI X remains ambitious. In the coming months, we’ll continue delivering significant improvements and feature enhancements, including:

- **Charts and Data Grid integration**: Deeper interoperability for cohesive data visualization.

> - **Further improvements in the DX of the new Design Agnostic Data Grid**: We’ll continue iterating on the unstyled core to deliver a seamless and customizable experience across diverse design ecosystems.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Further improvements in the DX of the new design-agnostic Data Grid**: We’ll continue iterating on the unstyled core to deliver a seamless and customizable experience across diverse design ecosystems.
```

> - **Further customization based on Composition**: Expanding our composable architecture for even more flexible customization.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Further customization based on composition**: Expanding our composable architecture for even more flexible customization.
```

- **Increased leverage of AI**: Harnessing advanced AI to unlock new insights and streamline data analysis.
- **Design and usability improvements**: Continuous refinements to enhance the overall user experience.

> - **Continue improvements on Server-Side integration**: Ongoing improvements for robust performance and scalability.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **More improvements to server-side integration**: Ongoing improvements for robust performance and scalability.
```

## How to Get Involved

> Your input is vital to our continuous improvement. We invite you to:

Reviewer 3: I don't love having three calls to action here, especially since two of them don't actually direct the reader anywhere.  I would suggest consolidating this final section into one clear CTA to get involved on GitHub.

> - **Share Your Feedback:** Let us know how these new features work for you and what you’d like to see next.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Share your feedback:** Let us know how these new features work for you and what you’d like to see next.
```

> - **Report Issues & Suggest Features:** Our [GitHub repository](https://github.com/mui/mui-x) is the perfect place to contribute.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Report issues and suggest features:** Our [GitHub repository](https://github.com/mui/mui-x) is the perfect place to contribute.
```

> - **Join Our Community:** Participate in user interviews and help steer the roadmap for future releases.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Join our community:** Participate in user interviews and help steer the roadmap for future releases.
```

  - [HTML Legend for Charts](#html-legend-for-charts)
  - [Charts composition](#charts-composition)
- [Enhanced License management and Telemetry](#enhanced-license-management-and-telemetry)
- [Priority Support – A New Support Service](#priority-support-a-new-support-service)
- [Support for Material UI](#support-for-material-ui)
- [Migration](#migration)
- [Long-term support (LTS)](#long-term-support-lts)
- [What's next](#whats-next)
- [How to get involved](#how-to-get-involved)

## Data Grid

### Pivoting [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan')

The wait is over! With pivoting, your users can easily restructure and summarize large datasets: group related data, calculate aggregates (such as sums, averages, and counts), and compare different data categories side by side.
This flexibility enables faster insight discovery and more efficient data analysis.

This feature is available right out of the box, but you can also create a preconfigured setup to tailor it to your user requirements.

<figure>
  <video autoplay muted loop playsinline width="1046" height="720" controls style="border: 0;">

>     <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/pivoting.mp4" type="video/mp4">

Reviewer 6: This is blurry on my end. We could rerecord this.

Reviewer 6: I pushed a version that is clearly better, but I don't know how to make this perfect. Whats clean in any case is that Screen Studio is crap for this use case: the hover is not in sync, the resolution is too low, the cursor is too big.

- **Data privacy:** No need to share your dataset—the service model only requires your column definitions and a few data samples.

Interested in bringing this feature to your users? [Contact us](mailto:sales@mui.com) to get your API Key!

### List view [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

We've promoted List view to stable, and over this major we're committed to enhancing this feature even further—making it easier to deliver a robust Data Grid experience on small screens.

<figure>
  <img width="512" height="768" alt="An example of a Data Grid's list view on a phone" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/list-view.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>An example of a Data Grid's list view on a phone</figcaption>
</figure>

Learn more about [List view](/x/react-data-grid/list-view/).

### Row spanning

Row spanning has also been promoted to stable, providing a reliable and flexible solution for merging cells across multiple rows.
This enhancement makes it easier to create complex, multi-row layouts within your Data Grid, allowing you to present your data more effectively.

> 

Reviewer 6: A screenshot could make sense.

Learn how to set up and use [Row spanning](/x/react-data-grid/row-spanning/).

### Server-side Aggregation and Lazy loading [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

The Data Source now supports advanced features such as server-side aggregation, on-demand data fetching for infinite scrolling, and lazy loading.

Explore all your options when handling [Server-side data](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/).

### Data source on the Community Plan

Great news—the Data Source move from the Pro Plan to the Community Plan (MIT licensed)!

We're unifying our approach to handling server-side data across all plans, creating a single, cohesive framework.

Explore your options in our [Data source docs](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/).

### New Toolbar

The [redesigned toolbar](/x/react-data-grid/components/toolbar/) not only looks fantastic but also empowers developers one step further through an open composition of subcomponents, allowing you to tailor the toolbar's layout precisely to your application's needs.

<figure>

>   <img width="1170" height="104" alt="The new toolbar's design" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/new-toolbar.png" loading="lazy" style="border: 0;">

Reviewer 6: The image is blurry, can we replace it?

  <figcaption>The new toolbar's design</figcaption>
</figure>

This new developer experience, based on composition, may feel different from our previous approach—but it sets a new standard.
We'll soon extend this enhanced experience to other key subcomponents, such as the filter panel and columns management panel, ensuring a cohesive and powerful toolkit for advanced customization.

Dive into our new docs section on [Components usage](/x/react-data-grid/components/usage/).

### Design agnostic core

We understand customization is important to you.
So with the ultimate goal of being fully customizable, we're taking the first step to allow using the Data Grid component without a single Material UI dependency (for example
without Emotion), opening the possibility to use the Data Grid with any design system—and this is just the beginning.

> Next up, we'll work to provide the best experience for you to build a full-feature Data Grid that fits all your design requirements.

Reviewer 6: I think to link to the docs or to remove. If we don't have docs yet, removing it seems much better, so we can properly introduce it in a v8.x minor version.

### No columns overlay

We've added a no-columns overlay to serve as a clear fallback when the Data Grid has no columns to show.

Learn more in the [No columns overlay documentation](/x/react-data-grid/overlays/#no-columns-overlay).

### Performance improvements

> We've made significant performance enhancements across the board—from smoother scrolling and faster Excel export to improved mount/resize and aggregation performance.

Reviewer 6: To share benchmark or to remove. In its current form, removing this seems much better.

## Date and Time Pickers

### Time Range Picker [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

It's finally here! The highly anticipated Time Range Picker component is designed for a straightforward and efficient experience, perfect for scheduling applications and detailed period inputs.

<figure>
  <video autoplay muted loop playsinline width="477" height="538" controls>

>     <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/time-range-picker.mp4" type="video/mp4">

Reviewer 6: This is blurry, can we rerecord this?

Author: I created an issue on ScreenStudio last week:
https://hub.screen.studio/p/custom-export-size

I'd still try to use the video from Screen Studio because I think the control of mouse cursor is quite valuable. (Like making the cursos big and for example when you cut a video, it automatically merge cursor positions)

        {children && <TreeItemGroupTransition {...treeItemData.getGroupTransitionProps()} />}
      </TreeItemRoot>
    </TreeItemProvider>
  );
}
```

Learn more this and other options on [Tree Item Customization docs](/x/react-tree-view/tree-item-customization/).

## Charts

### Funnel Charts [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

We have expanded our chart portfolio with the addition of Funnel Charts, providing a new way to visualize data conversions and drop-offs.

<figure>
  <img width="606" height="300" alt="Funnel charts examples" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/funnel-charts.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>Funnel charts examples</figcaption>
</figure>

You can learn more in the [Funnel](/x/react-charts/funnel/) docs.

### Radar Charts

Similarly, our Radar Charts offer a dynamic way to display multivariate data, enhancing your users data analysis capabilities.

<figure>
  <img width="606" height="300" alt="Radar charts examples" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/radar-charts.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>Radar charts examples</figcaption>
</figure>

You can learn more in the [Radar](/x/react-charts/radar/) docs.

> ### Server-side rendering for Charts

Reviewer 6: It looks like we are missing a proper docs page for this. Typically, I would imagine https://master--material-ui-x.netlify.app/x/react-data-grid/layout/ and add a h2 for SSR. (We will also need to do the same for the data grid).

With improved ESM support and seamless integration with modern bundlers like Vite and webpack, v7 represents the future of Material UI.
Supporting both simultaneously wasn't feasible, so we chose to move forward.

As a result, MUI X v8 only supports Material UI v7 by default.
We understand this change could present a challenge, but migrating to v7 has been designed to be as smooth as possible, with comprehensive migration guides and GitHub support to assist you every step of the way.

For users who want to upgrade to MUI X v8 while remaining on an earlier version of Material UI, we've prepared a [guide on usage with Material UI v5/v6](/x/migration/usage-with-material-ui-v5-v6/).

## Migration guide

We've published migration guides for Material UI and each of the advanced components.
These guides detail every breaking change from previous versions with the recommended approach to fix them.
We care deeply about providing a smooth migration, so it's been a top priority for us when planning our new major versions.

Please follow the instructions in our [migration guide](/x/migration/).

## Long-term support (LTS)

> We're now moving **MUI X v7 to long-term support**, while support for **MUI X v6 is discontinued**.

Reviewer 6: This seems pretty quick. Why not have 2 years of security fixes? We barely have anything to do anyway.

In addition to critical bug fixes and security updates, v7 will continue to receive occasional necessary updates as a safety net while you transition to v8.

You can check the [supported versions in our docs](/x/introduction/support/#supported-versions) for more information.

Once you've migrated to MUI X v8, you'll benefit from the latest features and performance enhancements, with no disruptive breaking changes until the next major release.

> ## What's next

Reviewer 6: We could list new components?

  </video>
  <figcaption>A common pivoting use case</figcaption>
</figure>

Check out the [Data Grid pivoting](/x/react-data-grid/pivoting/) documentation to learn more.

### Ask Your Table - AI assistance in the Data Grid [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan')

After a testing period with pilot users and customers, we're excited to introduce our new AI Assistant for the Data Grid: [Ask Your Table](/x/react-data-grid/ai-assistant/).

Now your users can interact with data using natural language queries and extract data insights faster than ever.

For example, if you're working with an Olympics medal dataset, you can simply ask, "Who won the most gold medals this century?" and the Data Grid will automatically apply the right filters, groupings, and aggregations to display your answer—all while keeping your dataset private.

<figure>
  <img width="2084" height="928" alt="An example use case showcasing the answer to the question with the correct sorting, filters and grouping" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/ask-your-table.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>An answer from the Data Grid</figcaption>
</figure>

> <figure>

Reviewer 4: Visually, it would be better to have at least one paragraph between the image and the video
maybe a paragraph stating that we provide customizable AI assistant panel out of the box?

### List view [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

We've promoted List view to stable, and over this major we're committed to enhancing this feature even further—making it easier to deliver a robust Data Grid experience on small screens.

<figure>
  <img width="512" height="768" alt="An example of a Data Grid's list view on a phone" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/list-view.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>An example of a Data Grid's list view on a phone</figcaption>
</figure>

Learn more about [List view](/x/react-data-grid/list-view/).

### Row spanning

Row spanning has also been promoted to stable, providing a reliable and flexible solution for merging cells across multiple rows.
This enhancement makes it easier to create complex, multi-row layouts within your Data Grid, allowing you to present your data more effectively.

<figure>
  <img alt="An example highlighting rows using row-spanning" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/row-spanning.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>An example highlighting rows using row-spanning</figcaption>
</figure>

Learn how to set up and use [Row spanning](/x/react-data-grid/row-spanning/).

> ### Server-side Aggregation and Lazy loading [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

Author: I've just added a new section for editing, @MBilalShafi. I decided to keep them independent, to separate the pro and community features. Please review the new update.

  - [Clear `ownerState` for slots](#clear-ownerstate-for-slots)
  - [Accessible DOM structure](#accessible-dom-structure)
  - [Keyboard editing on mobile Pickers](#keyboard-editing-on-mobile-pickers)
- [Tree View](#tree-view)
  - [Lazy loading children](#lazy-loading-children) [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')
  - [Automatic selection propagation](#automatic-selection-propagation)
  - [New customization hook](#new-customization-hook)
- [Charts](#charts)
  - [Funnel Charts](#funnel-charts)[<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')
  - [Radar Charts](#radar-charts)
  - [New animation engine](#new-animation-engine)
  - [Server-side rendering for Charts](#server-side-rendering-for-charts)
  - [Refined design and interaction](#refined-design-and-interaction)
  - [HTML Legend for Charts](#html-legend-for-charts)
  - [Charts composition](#charts-composition)
- [Enhanced License management and Telemetry](#enhanced-license-management-and-telemetry)
- [Priority Support – A New Support Service](#priority-support-a-new-support-service)
- [Support for Material UI](#support-for-material-ui)

> - [Migration](#migration)

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
- [Migration](#migration-guide)
```

Author: ```suggestion
- [Migration guide](#migration-guide)
```

### Ask Your Table - AI assistance in the Data Grid [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan')

After a testing period with pilot users and customers, we're excited to introduce our new AI Assistant for the Data Grid: [Ask Your Table](/x/react-data-grid/ai-assistant/).

Now your users can interact with data using natural language queries and extract data insights faster than ever.

For example, if you're working with an Olympics medal dataset, you can simply ask, "Who won the most gold medals this century?" and the Data Grid will automatically apply the right filters, groupings, and aggregations to display your answer—all while keeping your dataset private.

<figure>
  <img width="2084" height="928" alt="An example use case showcasing the answer to the question with the correct sorting, filters and grouping" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/ask-your-table.png" loading="lazy">
  <figcaption>An answer from the Data Grid</figcaption>
</figure>

Fully customize your own UI for direct input, or use the AI Assistant panel—featuring question history, detailed view of the applied changes, and conversation threads.

<figure>

>   <video autoplay muted loop playsinline width="1260" height="772" controls style="border: 0;">

Reviewer 4: for me, the video does not load anymore

Reviewer 2: It plays if i open the video URL in a new tab, but not the embedded version for some reason 🤔

Reviewer 2: It's working now...

Explore your options in our [Data source docs](/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/).

### Row spanning

Row spanning has also been promoted to stable, providing a reliable and flexible solution for merging cells across multiple rows.
This enhancement makes it easier to create complex, multi-row layouts within your Data Grid, allowing you to present your data more effectively.

<figure>
  <img alt="An example highlighting rows using row-spanning" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/row-spanning.png" loading="lazy" style="border: 0;" width="1762" height="630">
  <figcaption>An example highlighting rows using row-spanning</figcaption>
</figure>

Learn how to set up and use [Row spanning](/x/react-data-grid/row-spanning/).

### New Toolbar

The [redesigned toolbar](/x/react-data-grid/components/toolbar/) not only looks fantastic but also empowers developers one step further through an open composition of subcomponents, allowing you to tailor the toolbar's layout precisely to your application's needs.

<figure>
  <video autoplay muted loop playsinline width="1386" height="630" style="border: 0; width: 686px;">
    <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/toolbar.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>

>   <figcaption>A video showcasing our AI Assistant panel</figcaption>

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
  <figcaption>A video showcasing the new toolbar design.</figcaption>
```

This provides unparalleled flexibility to tailor your tree components to your project's unique requirements.

```js
const CustomTreeItemComponent = React.forwardRef(function CustomTreeItemComponent(
  { id, itemId, label, disabled, children }: TreeItemProps,
  ref: React.Ref<HTMLLIElement>,
) {
  const treeItemData = useTreeItem({ id, itemId, children, label, disabled, rootRef: ref });

  return (
    <TreeItemProvider {...treeItemData.getContextProviderProps()}>
      <TreeItemRoot {...treeItemData.getRootProps()}>
        <TreeItemContent {...treeItemData.getContentProps()}>
          <TreeItemLabel {...treeItemData.getLabelProps()} />
        </TreeItemContent>
        {children && <TreeItemGroupTransition {...treeItemData.getGroupTransitionProps()} />}
      </TreeItemRoot>
    </TreeItemProvider>
  );
}
```

Learn more this and other options on [Tree Item Customization docs](/x/react-tree-view/tree-item-customization/).

## Charts

### Funnel Charts [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

We have expanded our chart portfolio with the addition of Funnel Charts, providing a new way to visualize data conversions and drop-offs.

<figure>

>   <img alt="Funnel charts examples" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v8/funnel-charts.png" loading="lazy" width="1880" height="521">

Reviewer 7: It might be a bit miss leading to display figma screenshots that are not implemented, and not sure they will be available

Author: why wouldn't they be available?

Author: Or maybe the question is, when would they be available?

Reviewer 7: The one with the rectangle does not match the current implementation. It would be more appropriate to have a full rendering based on HTML instead of SVG.

For the pyramid, the question is "when would it be available"

Author: I'm replacing it due to the uncertainty of when,
But the current design is below standard and we should fix at least the color value of the font related to the pallete ASAP.
